# Bylaws

## Preamble

These Bylaws aim to:

1. reduce conflict between and within operational teams, by creating a
coherent decision-making and staffing process;

1. allow us to move forward even in the face of disagreement, by
providing democratic legitimacy to decisions and leadership;

1. promote accountability in our commitments to ourselves and
organizational partners by empowering the leadership team to align our
work with our road map and annual strategic plan; and

1. provide for transparency and checks and balances by which
leadership can be selected, recalled, and decisions revisited.

## 1. Name

The name of this Chapter is DxE SF Bay Area.

## 2. Purposes

The Chapter organizes activities for Direct Action Everywhere within
San Francisco, Oakland, Berkeley, and the surrounding areas.

## 3. Members

### 3.1. Membership Classes

The Chapter has three classes of members: Chapter Members, Organizers,
and Senior Organizers. The standards for Chapter Members, Organizers,
and Senior Organizers are [maintained by the Development
Committee](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19zTkVvR3hCX8HtJBF5J7ZMFTxHBSkSDKFV4E3KUXqNk/preview).

Unless explicitly stated otherwise, any rule applying to Chapter
Members also applies to Organizers, and any rule applying to
Organizers also applies to Senior Organizers.

### 3.2. Chapter Members

Chapter Members may attend the Chapter's regular and annual meetings.

Chapter Members may vote on community decisions that affect the social
fabric of the community as a whole. For example, what sorts of
community events we should be running, whether alcohol should be
served at DxE events, aesthetics of the Berkeley Animal Rights Center,
and so on.

### 3.3. Organizers

Organizers may vote in elections, on the governance structure, on
strategic plans for the Chapter, and any other matters the
parliamentary authority allows the membership to decide.

### 3.4. Movement-Power Index

To be in good standing and eligible to vote, a Member must be on the
Movement-Power Index at the time of the vote. That is, they must have
attended both a Protest and Community event in the previous month, or
attended both a Protest and Community event in the current month.

## 4. Officers

### 4.1. Officers and Duties

The officers of the Chapter are the Lead Organizer, 4 Core Members,
and the Secretary. These officers perform the duties prescribed by
these bylaws and by the parliamentary authority adopted by the
Chapter. Within the parliamentary authority, the offices of Lead
Organizer and Core Member correspond to President and Director,
respectively.

### 4.2. Lead Organizer

The Lead Organizer is responsible for making decisions on and
executing the previously-approved DxE annual strategy and budget,
proposing agendas for Chapter and SF Bay Core meetings,
staffing/removing people from Committees, Working Groups, and projects
(including the DxE website, DxE Facebook page, DxE email lists,
Facebook groups, and any other resources operated by the DxE SF Bay
Area chapter, including any resources operated by the DxE SF Bay Area
chapter by virtue of its role on the Global Steering Committee),
ensuring compliance with these bylaws, and fulfilling DxE principles
and values such as emergent leadership and inclusivity.

The Lead Organizer commits to seeking others' perspectives among the
relevant body of people in staffing and financial decisions before
making any unilateral decisions. Their actions are subject to the
advice and consent of the SF Bay Core and the Organizers at large.

The Lead Organizer will hold regular (at least monthly) open
discussions with updates on progress on strategic road map and
opportunity for all Chapter Members to ask questions or comment on
network matters. These will most often take place on Saturday
mornings.

### 4.3. Nomination Procedure, Time of Elections

Any Organizer who has been an Organizer for the last 6 months at the
time of election is eligible for office.

Officers will be nominated at the February regular Chapter
meeting. The election will then take place at a special meeting held
two weeks later.

### 4.4. Ballot Election, Term of Office, Removal from Office

Officers will be elected by ballot using [Reweighted Range
Voting](https://www.rangevoting.org/RRV.html). Officers will serve for
two years or until their successors are elected, and their term of
office will be begin at the close of the annual meeting at which they
are elected. Officers may be removed from office at the will of the
membership as provided in the parliamentary authority.

### 4.5. Office-Holding Limitations

A member cannot hold more than one office at a time.

## 5. Meetings

### 5.1. Regular Meetings

The Chapter will hold regular meetings on the first Sunday of each
month at the [Berkeley Animal Rights
Center](https://goo.gl/maps/qSLSR5QXyxJ49ASF6) from 11:30am to 2:30pm,
unless ordered otherwise by the Chapter or the SF Bay Core. Notice
must be sent to all members at least 1 week before the meeting.

At each meeting, the SF Bay Core will update members on progress,
obtain feedback, and answer questions about the past month's projects.

### 5.2. Annual Meetings

A meeting of all Organizers and Senior Organizers of the DxE SF Bay
Area chapter must occur with 30 days notice at which the SF Bay Core
will propose a strategic plan for the following year. The strategic
plan will be adopted at the end of meeting by majority vote of current
Organizers and Senior Organizers. If a majority threshold is not
secured, the SF Bay Core will make necessary modifications and
announce a new meeting (with at least 2 weeks' notice) within 30 days.

### 5.3. Special Meetings

Special meetings may be called by the Lead Organizer or by the SF Bay
Core and must be called upon the written request of ten
Organizers. The purpose of the meeting will be stated in the meeting
announcement, which must be sent to all members at least 3 days before
the meeting.

### 5.4. Quorum

Quorum for Chapter Member votes is 1/5 of Chapter Members in good
standing.

Quorum for Organizer votes is a majority of Organizers in good
standing.

### 5.5. Notice

Notice of meetings will be sent to the
[chaptermembers@dxe.io](mailto:chaptermembers@dxe.io) mailing list.

## 6. SF Bay Core

### 6.1. Composition

The SF Bay Core consists of the Lead Organizer and the 4 Core Members.

### 6.2. Duties and Powers

The SF Bay Core has full power and authority over the affairs of the
Chapter between its business meetings. They will also set the hour and
place of meetings, make recommendations to the Chapter, and perform
any other duties as specified in these bylaws.

### 6.3. Meetings

The SF Bay Core will hold regular meetings every Monday morning from
10am to 12pm, unless ordered otherwise by the SF Bay Core. Special
meetings of the SF Bay Core may be called by the Lead Organizer and
must be called upon the written request of two Core Members.

Meetings are normally open to the public, but advanced request is
required. Anyone interested in visiting an SF Bay Core meeting should
email
[sfbay@directactioneverywhere.com](mailto:sfbay@directactioneverywhere.com)
with the request.

## 7. Committees and Working Groups

### 7.1. Committees

The Lead Organizer suggests and has final say over the composition of
a set of Committees (including Communications, Community, Direct
Action, Finance, and any others deemed necessary). Committees are
focused on DxE's core functions, are expressly tasked with pushing
forward on DxE's annual strategy and its 40 year road map, and are
empowered to make decisions on resources. Committee members will be
appointed based on expertise, culture fit, and team effectiveness, and
team size will generally be limited to 7, unless exceptional
circumstances justify a larger team.

### 7.2. Working Groups

The Lead Organizer has final say over the [composition of official
Working
Groups](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mUybB0HQwd5pEJ2t5-uziFSlTGaExSyx3_iTIQf_HE4/preview).
Working Groups will determine their own processes and meeting
schedules, and will coordinate with other Working Groups via a
designated Committee. Where there is no request for funds/resources or
conflict between Working Groups or conflict with the chapter strategy,
Working Groups can continue to work autonomously.

Working Groups can choose to remain unofficial and therefore
completely independent if they do not seek DxE resources and mailing
lists. The DxE SF Bay Area chapter will work with unofficial Working
Groups on the basis of free association. Conflicts between Working
Groups will be resolved by the Lead Organizer in consultation with the
relevant Committees.

### 7.3. Membership Standards

The point person for a Committee or Working Group may impose
reasonable requirements for training, agreements, work standards, and
rules of order for that Committee or Working Group.

### 7.4. Resources

Requests for resources must be directed to the Lead Organizer or
relevant Committee. The Lead Organizer has final say over allocation
of resources.

### 7.5. Removal of Working Groups

An official Working Group will be dissolved or become unofficial if
the group fails to meet the relevant standards, violates DxE's
principles and values, or for any other good faith reason
(e.g. redundancy, conflict with other Working Groups) set out by the
Lead Organizer or relevant Committee lead.

### 7.6. Removal of Working Group Members

Members of official Working Groups may be removed due to violations of
DxE's principles and values, [code of
conduct](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1v1bSO9UCCgifH0UZfsfZ-5CEqtUOQ7tXL5lBmJoE9w4/preview),
failure to meet relevant standards, or any other good faith reason
(e.g. redundancy, conflict with other Working Groups) set out by the
Lead Organizer, relevant Committee lead, or relevant Working Group
point person.

### 7.7. List of Working Groups

The SF Bay Core must keep a list of official Working Groups, Chapter
Members, Organizers and Senior Organizers.

## 8. Parliamentary Authority

The rules contained in the 11th edition of *Robert's Rules of Order
Newly Revised* will govern the Chapter in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with these bylaws
and any [special rules of order](special-rules.md) the Chapter may
adopt.

## 9. Amendment of Bylaws

These bylaws may be amended at any regular Chapter meeting by a 2/3
vote, provided that the amendment was submitted in writing at the
previous regular meeting.
